README.md, before:

# piton

**piton** is a python package for building models using EHR data.

**piton** offers the following four main types of functionality. In order, they are the ability to:
1. Convert EHR and claims data into a common schema, where each patient is associated with a timeline of events extracted from the EHR
2. Apply labeling functions on that schema in order to derive labels for each patient
3. Apply featurization schemes to obtain feature matrices for each patient
4. Perform other common tasks necessary for research with EHR data

# Documentation

https://ehr-ml.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ has (outdated) documentation, including setup instructions and a tutorial using SynPuf data.

# Installation

Special note for NERO users:

You will need to install cuda manually until cuda version is updated on the nero. Follow the following steps for nero.

1. Download the right version of cuda on your local machine and transfer it over a folder in nero [link](https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-11.1.1-download-archive?target_os=Linux&target_arch=x86_64&target_distro=Ubuntu&target_version=1804&target_type=runfilelocal)
2. Run the installer as bash command by providing path to install such as `bash <CUDA_PATH> --installpath=<INSTALL_PATH>`, where `<CUDA_PATH>` is the path to the file you downloaded/transferred in step 1 and `<INSTALL_PATH>` is where you'd like to store the CUDA installation files. During installation, uncheck all the boxes except cuda toolkit.
3. After the installation completes, it will spit out two paths on terminal that should be put into your .bashrc file:
```
export PATH="<INSTALL_PATH>/bin:$PATH"
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH="<INSTALL_PATH>/lib64:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH"
```
4. Delete the `/tmp/cuda-installer.log` file or it will create problems (e.g., segmentation fault) for other users

Note: you may need to restart your terminal for the changes to reflect

As Nero does not have internet access, you must run the following before running the code below.

```
export DISTDIR=/local-scratch/nigam/distdir
```

Run the following:

```
conda create -n PITON_ENV python=3.10 bazel=5 clangxx=14 -c conda-forge
conda activate PITON_ENV
git clone https://github.com/som-shahlab/piton.git
cd piton
pip install -e .
```



# Precommit checks

## Installation
```
conda install pre-commit
conda install pytest
pre-commit install
```

## Pytest test

```
pytest tests
```

## Pre-commit test

This will run automatically on every commit.

You can also run it manually with:

```
pre-commit run --all-files
```


## Running one of our tools
```
export OMOP_SOURCE=/share/pi/nigam...
export MODIFIED_OMOP_DESTINATION=/share/pi/nigam...
python tools/blah.py $OMOP_SOURCE $MODIFIED_OMOP_DESTINATION
```


## GZIP decompression commands
```
export OMOP_SOURCE=/share/pi/nigam...
gunzip $OMOP_SOURCE/**/*.csv.gz
```

## Zstandard compression commands
```
export OMOP_SOURCE=/share/pi/nigam...
zstd -1 --rm $OMOP_SOURCE/**/*.csv
```

## Generating extract

```
export OMOP_SOURCE=/share/pi/nigam...
export EXTRACT_DESTINATION=/share/pi/nigam...
export EXTRACT_LOGS=/share/pi/nigam...

etl_stanford_omop $OMOP_SOURCE $EXTRACT_DESTINATION $EXTRACT_LOGS --num_threads 10
```

Commit message:

Updated with pointer re:how to install PyTorch
cudatoolkit 11.3 should work alright with CUDA 11.1 (not ideal, but casts tensors to `cuda` just fine - may want additional tests to verify)

README.md, after:

# piton

**piton** is a python package for building models using EHR data.

**piton** offers the following four main types of functionality. In order, they are the ability to:
1. Convert EHR and claims data into a common schema, where each patient is associated with a timeline of events extracted from the EHR
2. Apply labeling functions on that schema in order to derive labels for each patient
3. Apply featurization schemes to obtain feature matrices for each patient
4. Perform other common tasks necessary for research with EHR data

# Documentation

https://ehr-ml.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ has (outdated) documentation, including setup instructions and a tutorial using SynPuf data.

# Installation

Special note for NERO users:

You will need to install cuda manually until cuda version is updated on the nero. Follow the following steps for nero.

1. Download the right version of cuda on your local machine and transfer it over a folder in nero [link](https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-11.1.1-download-archive?target_os=Linux&target_arch=x86_64&target_distro=Ubuntu&target_version=1804&target_type=runfilelocal)
2. Run the installer as bash command by providing path to install such as `bash <CUDA_PATH> --installpath=<INSTALL_PATH>`, where `<CUDA_PATH>` is the path to the file you downloaded/transferred in step 1 and `<INSTALL_PATH>` is where you'd like to store the CUDA installation files. During installation, uncheck all the boxes except cuda toolkit.
3. After the installation completes, it will spit out two paths on terminal that should be put into your .bashrc file:
```
export PATH="<INSTALL_PATH>/bin:$PATH"
export LD_LIBRARY_PATH="<INSTALL_PATH>/lib64:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH"
```
4. Delete the `/tmp/cuda-installer.log` file or it will create problems (e.g., segmentation fault) for other users

Note: you may need to restart your terminal for the changes to reflect

As Nero does not have internet access, you must run the following before running the code below.

```
export DISTDIR=/local-scratch/nigam/distdir
```

Run the following:

```
conda create -n PITON_ENV python=3.10 bazel=5 clangxx=14 -c conda-forge
conda activate PITON_ENV
git clone https://github.com/som-shahlab/piton.git
cd piton
pip install -e .
```

If you want to use PyTorch for deep learning, you can install it as follows (first install numpy dependency):
```python
conda install numpy
conda install pytorch==1.12.0 torchvision==0.13.0 torchaudio==0.12.0 cudatoolkit=11.3 -c pytorch
```

# Precommit checks

## Installation
```
conda install pre-commit
conda install pytest
pre-commit install
```

## Pytest test

```
pytest tests
```

## Pre-commit test

This will run automatically on every commit.

You can also run it manually with:

```
pre-commit run --all-files
```


## Running one of our tools
```
export OMOP_SOURCE=/share/pi/nigam...
export MODIFIED_OMOP_DESTINATION=/share/pi/nigam...
python tools/blah.py $OMOP_SOURCE $MODIFIED_OMOP_DESTINATION
```


## GZIP decompression commands
```
export OMOP_SOURCE=/share/pi/nigam...
gunzip $OMOP_SOURCE/**/*.csv.gz
```

## Zstandard compression commands
```
export OMOP_SOURCE=/share/pi/nigam...
zstd -1 --rm $OMOP_SOURCE/**/*.csv
```

## Generating extract

```
export OMOP_SOURCE=/share/pi/nigam...
export EXTRACT_DESTINATION=/share/pi/nigam...
export EXTRACT_LOGS=/share/pi/nigam...

etl_stanford_omop $OMOP_SOURCE $EXTRACT_DESTINATION $EXTRACT_LOGS --num_threads 10
```
